

##  Front Matter

    Title           : Typeless Routing
    Author(s)       : Mateusz 'esavier' Matejuk
    Team            : CommonDataLayer
    Reviewer        : CommonDataLayer
    Created         : 2021-06-06
    Last updated    : 2021-06-10
    Version         : 1.0.0
    CDL feature ID  : CDLF-00015-00

##### Abstract

     The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL
     NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and
     "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
     RFC 2119.

[RFC 2119 source][rfc2119]

## Glossary

##### Terminology
* CDL - [Common Data Layer Project][cdl-project]
* DR - Data Router, an CDL component responsible for ingesting and routing initial messages.
* SR - Schema Registry, an CDL component responsible for keeping information about the type of the object conveyed inside the message.
* User - user of the CDL. In this case, the user knows how the CDL works, and is assumed to have access to the API and code unless stated otherwise.
* Message - (abstract) message sent to CDL for processing
* Breaking Change - change in behavior, or API of the CDL that may result with system breakage on release update.
* MD - man-day - amount of work completed by one developer in one work day.
* Routing Information - information necessary for DR to successfully deliver the provided message to its destination. This includes, but is not limited to, addresses, ports, connections, metadata associated with ownership of the message, and abstract connection medium used by a specific repository handler.
* CFGS - Configuration Service. Currently, with abstract behavior until a proper RFC will be concluded.

##### Features:
* [CDLF-00004-00][1] - CDL Feature - Data Router introduction and message routing.
* [CDLF-00009-00][2] - CDL Feature - Message Batching - ability to digest array of proper CDL (v1 Input format) messages.
* [CDLF-0000A-00][3] - CDL Feature - Message Ordering - ability to guarantee linear message ingestion.
* [CDLF-0000C-00][4] - CDL Feature - GRPC as a main communication method, including DR input (direct ingestion)
* [CDLF-0000F-00][5] - CDL Feature - Configuration Service
* [CDLF-0001B-00][6] - CDL Feature - Object-side configuration, ability to provide additional, custom behavior for objects. In this case, object means any CDL object, including database object, Schema or View.

##### Formats:
v1 Input Format - Standard CDL message format up to this point.
```
    {
        object_id: UUID,
        schema_id: UUID,
        data: { any valid json },
    }
```

V2 Input Format - Update CDL message format to accommodate Typeless Routing.
```
    {
        configuration: {
            validation: bool,
        } <optional>
        repository_id: String
        schema_id: UUID, <optional>
        object_id: UUID,
        data: { any valid json },
    }
```

Routing Information Mapping
```
    {
        repository_id: String
        routing_information: {...}
    }
```


## Introduction

#### Background
It was requested from the CDL stack to be able to route messages based on metadata in specific cases, ignoring or substituting information related to schemas.
Currently, CDL is using Schema to decide which database to route the message to. All routing information is kept together with the type information, allowing multiple components and services to get this information if needed from one specific place (which, for the record, is the Schema Registry). After implementing this feature, CDL will be able to at least route the messages without using schema registry to get routing information from (also known internally as "schemaless cdl").
The Scope of this document encapsulates changes to the current architecture and impact to already present features.

#### Assumptions
- We have to assume that different configuration of the CDL may exist and may be used for purposes CDL was not explicitly designed to used for.
- Considering Message format V2 to be implemented, either one of (schema_id, repository_id) have to be present
- In case Both variations of the optional parameters introduced are present, repository_id takes precedence.
- It may be necessary to make this feature dependent on Configuration Service, and also split 'type' information from 'routing' information in schema_registry, preferably moving it to the configuration service.

##### Limitations
Fully deployed CDL means a set of default features and configurations, including, but not limited to: ordering, materialization, access groups, at least 3 standard and default databases (Postgres, VictoriaMetrics, and object repository).
With introduction of this feature, not all of those features and sets will be fully working or accessible. It is crucial to provide sufficient explanation and documentation, to clearly communicate the limitations that this feature entails.

Currently, we can assume two scenarios:
1. Absence of Schema Registry
2. Limited presence of Schema Registry

In the second case, assuming initial configuration or "mapping" of the repository_id to routing information can be provided from a different source than the Schema Registry, There is no issue in terms of routing.
However, in the first case, without SR there is no possibility of providing advanced features like Materialization.

## Proposed Solution

### Configuration Service
Configuration Service must be able to deliver routing information or in other words, "map" repository_id to routing information. There are two ways of handling routing information in terms of Data Router: caching it and expecting updates, or actively getting the data from CFGS :
- (PULL) In case of actively pulling data from CFGS, additional, unnecessary traffic and latency may be observed, additionally putting both services to greater stress (CPU and memory usage), however it will allow for greater consistency of message delivery to the proper repositories.
- (PUSH) In case of caching, DR have to keep all routing information available for the current configuration, additionally CFGS must have an ability to update and notify routing information stored in DR. Comparing to pulling, there is slightly greater chance of data being inconsistently delivered and relatively bigger memory usage in DR (caching), however system itself will be much more responsive, have lower latency (since there is no additional network request per each incoming message) and CFGS does not have to scale with DR to keep up with the network load.

### CIM Message changes
CIM message have to be updates as described in the "Formats" section of this document. Additional field with repository_id should be present, while type

### Data Router behavior:
Changes to the data router will be more significant. Considering that mapping already exist, and it can deliver reliable routing information, schema should not be used and marked optional. Schema, or "Type" of the object is only relevant if object have to be validated before being inserted to the database, and that, for user convenience, can be accomplished by providing new field related to object-side configuration feature - `configuration.valdate:bool` as well as default behavior in case configuration is missing:
```
- if configuration was provided
- - if validate=true
- - - schema_id must be provided in CIM
- - - schema registry must be operational
- - - valdation must be performed
- - if validate=false
- - - schema_id may be absent
- - - if schema_id was provided, it will be ignored
- - - valdation must not be performed

- if configuration was not provided
- - if schema_id was provided
- - - valddate
- - - valdation must be performed
- - if schema_id was not provided
- - - valdation must not be performed
```

### Schema Registry
Changes in schema registry would be limited to moving all the routing information from the Schema type, and moving those in some form of (list of mappings) to CFGS,
no additional, high-level changes are necessary.


### Services dependent on Routing Information
Services like for example Query Router have to be updated as well, to accommodate new data source.



###### Major concerns:
There are a lot of changes to be made regarding this feature, and it has to be thoroughly tested before releasing. Total overhaul of how the messages look will force us to document all the changes and made them clear for the users. In addition, this Feature depends on the Configuration Service that currently lacks RFC and documentation (in R'n'D state), and Object-side Configuration (which is in Suggestion State)

###### Notes:
No testing nor PoC was created for this solution, please treat it as being theoretical.

## Further Considerations

#### Impact on other teams
This feature MUST be released as a "breaking change", since it will impact basic message format.

#### Scalability
No noticeable impact. Additionally, if we will go with PULL configuration model, we will be able to alleviate the amount of synthetic traffic and lower the total amount of required instances.

#### Availability problems
Solution depends on the availability and of two other features, one of them partially.

#### Testing
This feature MUST undergo thorough testing before being accepted. Test cases MUST include:
* Failure scenarios:
    - Edge scenarios where messages are unreadable or follow worst-case scenario path.
* Routing behaviors:
    - config available, validation disabled,
    - config available, validation enabled,
    - config unavailable, schema available,
    - config unavailable, schema unavailable,
* Responsiveness test:
    - config update latency
* Happy test:
    - Proper behavior with proper values.
* Format testing for each, readily available repository type:
    - Document storage.
    - Time series storage.
    - Binary storage.
* Performance testing with all the before mentioned cases:

## Deliberation

#### Out of scope
* Any other, not mentioned features, were not taken into consideration in this scope.

#### Open Questions:
* Compatibility with other, not mentioned features is not known, especially MessageGroups, due to lack of the technical design. However, in theory, there should be no problem coupling additional message-related features with this one


#####  References:
CDL :
- [CDL project](https://github.com/epiphany-platform/CommonDataLayer)
- [CDL - RFC discussions](https://github.com/epiphany-platform/CommonDataLayer/discussions/categories/rfc)
- [CDL - RFC candidates](https://github.com/epiphany-platform/CommonDataLayer/tree/develop/docs/rfc)
- [CDL - RFC releases](https://github.com/epiphany-platform/CommonDataLayer/tree/main/docs/rfc)

[1]: https://github.com/epiphany-platform/CommonDataLayer/tree/main/docs/rfc/CDLF-00004-01-rfc-01.md
[2]: https://github.com/epiphany-platform/CommonDataLayer/tree/main/docs/rfc/CDLF-00009-01-rfc-01.md
[3]: https://github.com/epiphany-platform/CommonDataLayer/tree/main/docs/rfc/CDLF-0000A-01-rfc-01.md
[4]: https://github.com/epiphany-platform/CommonDataLayer/tree/main/docs/rfc/CDLF-0000C-01-rfc-01.md
[5]: https://github.com/epiphany-platform/CommonDataLayer/tree/main/docs/rfc/CDLF-0000F-01-rfc-01.md
[6]: https://github.com/epiphany-platform/CommonDataLayer/tree/main/docs/rfc/CDLF-0001B-01-rfc-01.md
